False-clearance impact audit and proposed fixes
===============================================

Audit date: 2026-09-09

Scope
-----

This audit covers the current harmonized 300-step smoke outputs in:

  outputs/physical_ai_smoke_300_seed1_2_harmonized

The false-clearance-only condition contains both maps, seeds 1 and 2, and
the four primary methods. This is 16 completed run cells. I also inspected
the older 10-seed pre-harmonization outputs as supporting evidence only; they
are not treated as final results because Room32 was incomplete and those runs
predate the current map-authoring harmonization.

Executive conclusion
--------------------

False Clearance is capable of producing a meaningful navigation effect, but
the current implementation does not make every authored event a meaningful
navigation intervention. Permanent obstacle targets are intentionally retained
as valid attack targets per the experiment decision; the fixes below improve
consequence selection and measurement without removing that condition.

In the current 300-step smoke condition:

  - every map/seed/method received the same authored attack events and cells
    for its paired comparison;
  - all 16 run cells delivered and accepted every false-clearance report cell,
    and every accepted cell had nonzero fusion weight;
  - default-map runs had false-clearance-tagged path changes in 7 of 8 runs;
  - Room32 runs had false-clearance-tagged path changes in 8 of 8 runs;
  - default runs averaged approximately 48 sampled steps whose preferred route
    was marked attacker-affected, although that metric is currently polluted
    by a counterfactual bug described below;
  - Room32 averaged approximately 36 such sampled steps and had an average of
    6.25 no-path steps in this short smoke condition; and
  - the observed impact is not comparable to a no-attack baseline yet, so the
    delivery counts alone cannot be interpreted as a causal delivery loss.

The attack is therefore impactful enough to support discussion, particularly
on Room32, but the evidence should not yet claim that every accepted false
clearance caused a navigation change. The current metrics mix fusion impact,
route impact, and physical-map constraints.

Observed current outputs
------------------------

The following values are averages across seeds 1 and 2 for each method in the
false-clearance-only condition. They are short 300-step smoke runs, not the
final 3000-step experiment.

Default map

  method          deliveries  total replans  FC replan checks  FC path changes  route-affected steps  no-path steps
  full_trust      5.5         34.0           4.0               1.0              61.0                  0.0
  majority_vote  5.5         35.0           1.0               0.5              17.0                  0.0
  trust_fused    5.5         33.5           4.0               1.0              61.0                  0.0
  source_memory  5.5         34.5           4.0               1.0              52.5                  0.0

Room32

  method          deliveries  total replans  FC replan checks  FC path changes  route-affected steps  no-path steps
  full_trust      4.0         36.0           3.0               2.5              31.5                  6.5
  majority_vote  3.5         37.5           2.5               2.0              37.5                 16.0
  trust_fused    4.5         35.5           2.5               2.0              38.0                  3.5
  source_memory  4.5         35.5           2.5               2.0              38.0                  3.5

False-clearance dosage was paired correctly. Each current manifest contains
two false-clearance events. Depending on the seed, each event has three or
four cells, so each run authors six to eight cells and delivers those cells to
both benign robots. The manifests and authored attack locations are identical
across methods within each map/seed comparison.

What is working
---------------

1. False Clearance is represented as a FREE claim against a physically
   blocked obstacle footprint. The report audit correctly records the report
   cells and attack type.

2. Current LiDAR authority is preserved. A current direct BLOCKED observation
   is not overridden by a false-clearance report. This is the correct safety
   rule for the simulated sensor model.

3. A newer false-clearance report can supersede stale local BLOCKED memory.
   This is the mechanism that can expose a shortcut and cause a replan.

4. The current short runs show real route effects. For example, several
   Room32 runs contain FC-tagged replans with changed paths, and the route
   plots show nonzero signed route effects after attack activity.

5. Attack equality is clean in the current smoke outputs: method choice does
   not change the authored event count, event steps, target cells, claim type,
   sender, recipients, or report-cell dosage.

Target-class decision: permanent obstacles remain eligible
-----------------------------------------------------------

The experiment intentionally allows False Clearance to target either a
permanent or temporary physical obstacle. Authored permanent obstacles are
part of the physical world but are not added to the robots' immutable base-map
grid, so a newer accepted FREE claim can clear remembered BLOCKED evidence
when the target is outside current LiDAR. Current direct LiDAR authority remains
unchanged.

The previous audit treated this as a methodology mismatch. That conclusion is
not being applied: permanent targets remain in scope for this experiment.
The actual safeguard is consequence screening, not target-class removal.

Observed consequence of an ineffective candidate:

  - a FREE report about a permanent obstacle can be accepted and have nonzero
    fusion weight while remaining permanently non-traversable;
  - the attack can be counted as accepted/influential without changing a
    route; and
  - in default/false_clearance/seed_0001, attack-0000 targets a permanent
    obstacle and has zero shortcut benefit and zero route-cost reduction for
    the inspected full-trust run.

Decision/fix:

  - Keep permanent and temporary False Clearance targets eligible.
  - Require a positive frozen-recon shortcut score before either class is
    selected.
  - Apply physical-class diversity only after that consequence screen; do not
    select an ineffective permanent target merely to satisfy class balance.

Confirmed issue 2: candidate selection does not require a navigation benefit
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

_select_episode_attack_target() calculates
recon_false_clearance_shortcut_steps, but it rejects a candidate only when the
generic detour score is zero. A candidate can therefore have:

  - positive generic bottleneck/detour relevance;
  - zero recon_false_clearance_shortcut_steps; and
  - no observed mission for which clearing the footprint shortens a route.

The authoring loop also prefers an unused physical class before it globally
optimizes attack consequence. This is why a permanent target with no shortcut
benefit can be selected merely to satisfy class coverage.

Recommended fix:

  - Treat positive recon_false_clearance_shortcut_steps as the primary
    eligibility condition for a navigation-impact False Clearance event.
  - Rank candidates by positive shortcut benefit first, then use traffic,
    bottleneck, and proximity as tie-breakers.
  - Make physical-class diversity a soft preference only after consequence
    eligibility is satisfied.
  - If no positive candidate exists, record an explicit authoring warning or
    skip the event instead of silently authoring an ineffective attack.

This remains fair because the score is computed from frozen reconnaissance
states, static geometry, and the authored physical schedule. It does not use
defense-dependent live routes.

Confirmed issue 3: route-impact counterfactual has the wrong hard-block rule
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

The route-impact code compares planning with and without malicious claims. In
the no-attacker branch it passes:

  math.isinf(fusion.routing_cost_excluding_sender(...))

as the hard-block callback to RobotBeliefMap.traversal_cost(). For the primary
probabilistic methods, routing_cost() is deliberately a finite soft cost even
when the fused occupancy probability crosses the hard blocked threshold.
The normal branch uses the method's hard-block contract, but the exclusion
branch does not.

This makes the two counterfactuals semantically different even when there are
zero malicious claims. Ordinary peer BLOCKED evidence can be hard-blocking in
the normal branch and merely expensive in the exclusion branch.

Observed symptom:

  - in the current false-clearance-only smoke outputs, 6 of 16 run cells have
    a positive attacker-attributable route cost during RECONNAISSANCE, before
    the first false-clearance injection;
  - in default/false_clearance/seed_0001/full_trust, the route plot shows a
    positive attacker cost around steps 75-95 even though the first attack is
    at step 138 and active_malicious_claim_count is zero; and
  - a direct 76-step replay confirmed that the robot had zero malicious
    claims, while the old counterfactual reported a path-length difference of
    26 and a cost difference of approximately 33.38. Using the method's true
    exclusion-aware hard-block predicate reduced that difference to zero.

This is a confirmed reporting/metric bug. It inflates steps_route_affected_by_
attacker and can make a False Clearance route plot look impactful before the
attack exists.

Recommended fix:

  - Add a public exclusion-aware hard-block helper that delegates to the
    defense runner's is_hard_blocked() with excluded_sender_id and
    excluded_claim_predicate.
  - Use that helper as the hard_blocked_fn in the no-malicious counterfactual.
  - Add a regression test asserting zero route impact before the first attack
    when the robot has no malicious claims.

Confirmed issue 4: fusion influence is mislabeled as navigation influence
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

false_clearance_report_cells_influential is currently defined as the number of
accepted cells whose operational fusion weight is greater than zero. That is
a valid fusion metric, but it does not mean the cell changed a route, a
planner decision, or a delivery outcome.

In all 16 current smoke cells, every delivered False Clearance cell is counted
as fusion-influential. Nevertheless, several of those same runs have zero
route-affected steps for at least one method, and permanent targets cannot be
made traversable at all.

Recommended fix:

  - Keep the existing field but rename it in user-facing reports to
    fusion-influential cells, or document the denominator explicitly.
  - Add separate navigation metrics such as:
      * cells that changed a traversability decision;
      * attack events that changed the selected path;
      * attack events that changed path cost by at least epsilon; and
      * attack events followed by an FC-tagged changed replan.
  - Do not use fusion-influential cells as evidence that navigation was
    affected.

Confirmed issue 5: route-overlap is measured after immediate replanning
----------------------------------------------------------------------

The attack_route_impact event is emitted after accepted reports have already
been allowed to trigger an immediate replan. The event then computes
attack_current_route_overlap_cells against the robot's current path. That path
may already be the new path selected because of the attack.

This makes the field unsuitable as a pre-attack opportunity measure. In the
current false-clearance smoke outputs, 63 of 64 impact rows have zero current
route overlap. That is plausible for shortcut attacks, but it is also a sign
that the metric is not measuring the route that existed when the report was
received.

Recommended fix:

  - Snapshot the pre-fusion route before processing attack reports.
  - Record pre_attack_route_overlap_cells using that snapshot.
  - Separately record post_replan_route_overlap_cells if the new path is useful
    for visualization.
  - Keep both fields rather than changing the meaning of the existing field
    silently.

Confirmed issue 6: duplicate target reuse reduces attack diversity
-------------------------------------------------------------------

In Room32/false_clearance/seed_0002, both authored events target the same
permanent obstacle footprint. The second event has prior_use_count=1. The
reports are newer and can be accepted as replacements, so this is not an
out-of-order-report bug. It is a scenario-diversity problem: two attack slots
become repeated claims about the same cells rather than two independent
physical interventions.

Recommended fix:

  - Prefer an unused physical target for each False Clearance event.
  - Permit reuse only when no unused positive-consequence candidate remains.
  - Record target reuse in authoring_warnings and in candidate metadata.
  - Do not let diversity logic override the positive shortcut-benefit rule.

Room32 no-path observations
---------------------------

Room32/false_clearance/seed_0001 shows peer_fusion_disconnected no-path steps
for all four methods, ranging from 4 to 32 steps in the 300-step smoke run.
The truth grid and direct-belief counterfactuals remain connected; the
diagnostic classifies the operational fused belief as disconnected.

False Clearance claims are FREE claims, so they cannot directly create a
blocked barrier. The no-path episode begins after the first attack in some
runs, but the current route-impact counterfactual bug and the shared peer
reports prevent attributing it to False Clearance alone. After issue 3 is
fixed, this should be rerun with a matched no-attack manifest replay and a
cell-level diagnostic identifying which accepted BLOCKED claims form the
fused barrier.

This should not be “fixed” by making FREE claims stronger or by suppressing
the no-path counter. The experiment needs to distinguish a real defense-induced
peer-fusion barrier from an attack-caused navigation effect.

Recommended implementation order
---------------------------------

1. Fix the exclusion-aware hard-block counterfactual. This removes the
   pre-attack false-positive route influence.

2. Require a positive frozen-recon shortcut benefit and stop forcing an
   ineffective physical class.

3. Split fusion-influence and navigation-impact metrics, and snapshot the
   pre-fusion route for overlap accounting.

4. Prevent duplicate target reuse when a distinct positive-consequence target
   exists.

5. Run a matched no-attack control plus the same false-clearance manifest for
   10 seeds on both maps. Report deliveries, replans, no-path steps, route
   changes, FC fusion-influential cells, FC navigation-impact events, map
   error, and trust crossings separately.

Expected interpretation after these fixes
------------------------------------------

False Clearance should not be expected to create the same hard blockage as
Fake Obstacle. Its legitimate mechanism is a misleading shortcut: it removes
stale remembered blockage and can cause a robot to select a route through a
physical obstacle that it has not currently sensed. A convincing result is
therefore a measurable increase in shortcut/path changes, route cost or
delivery-cycle time, and possibly no-path behavior in some methods, while
preserving the rule that current direct LiDAR blocks cannot be overridden.

The attack should be considered sufficiently impactful for discourse when the
matched no-attack comparison shows a repeatable navigation or delivery
difference across seeds, not merely because all false-clearance reports have
nonzero fusion weight.

Implementation status
---------------------

Implemented in the simulator and reporter:

  - the route-impact exclusion branch now uses the same method-specific
    hard-block predicate as normal planning;
  - False Clearance candidates require a positive frozen-recon shortcut score;
  - shortcut magnitude is the primary target-ranking signal, with physical
    class diversity only a soft tie-break;
  - distinct positive-consequence targets are preferred, and reuse is recorded
    in candidate metadata and authoring warnings when unavoidable;
  - fusion influence is kept separate from navigation-influential cells;
  - attack event records now include pre-fusion and post-replan route overlap;
  - a new event-level navigation-impact plot is generated for every run; and
  - user-facing report labels identify the existing claim metric as
    fusion-influential rather than navigation-influential.

Permanent obstacle targets were not removed. This follows the experiment
decision that both permanent and temporary physical targets remain in scope.

Validation after implementation:

  - focused regression tests: 57 passed;
  - full regression suite: 182 passed;
  - short final matrix: both maps, three attack sets, one seed, and four
    methods completed (24/24 runs);
  - all 24 run plot manifests contained 13 generated plots and zero warnings;
  - false-clearance route-impact records had zero pre-attack counterfactual
    penalty in the short validation matrix.
